.\" Process this file with "groff -man -Tascii foo.1" or "nbman2ht foo.1"
.\" See NodeBrain Developer Guide for project standards
.\"
.TH nb.lib 3 "December 2014" "NodeBrain 0.9.03" "NodeBrain Administrator Guide"
.SH NAME
nb.lib - NodeBrain Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <nb/nb.h>

\fBgcc\fP \fImain_pgm\fP\fB.c -lnb\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The NodeBrain library, \fBlibnb.so\fP, makes the NodeBrain C API
available to programs and modules that plug-in to the NodeBrain Rule Engine.
.SH EXAMPLE
If you want to experiment with embedding the NodeBrain interpreter in your
own program, you can use nb.c and various modules in the source distribution as
sample code.
Here's a trivial example.

.\"ht fixed
.nf
  #include <nb/nb.h>
  int main(int argc,char *argv[]){
    nbCELL context;

    printf("hello\\n");

    // Start the NodeBrain interpreter
    context=nbStart(argc,argv);

    // Issue some commands 
    nbCmd(context,"assert a==x+y;",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);
    nbCmd(context,"define r1 on(a>4):show -cells",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);
    nbCmd(context,"assert x=2,y=3;",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);

    // Stop the interpreter
    nbStop(context);
    }
.fi

The \fINodeBrain Library\fP manual describing the C API functions.

.SH FILES
.IP nb.h
Header file for NodeBrain C API.
.IP libnb.so
NodeBrain C API library - dynamic.
.IP libnb.a
NodeBrain C API library - static.
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP NB_MODULE_PATH
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(3).
.P
.SH BUGS
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1).
Please report bugs to <bugs@nodebrain.org> or enter a bug report
at http://nodebrain.org.

.SH AUTHOR
Ed Trettevik <eat@nodebrain.org>

.SH DOCUMENTATION
Online documentation is available at http://nodebrain.org.
Manuals are also available in Texinfo format in the
git repository.  These documents are included in source
distribution files.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"ht page
\fBnodebrain\fP(7),
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1),    
.\"ht page
\fBnb.cfg\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.syn\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(7) 
.\"ht page
\fBnbkit\fP(1),
.\"ht page
\fBnbkit.caboodle\fP(7)
