.\" Process this file with "groff -man -Tascii foo.1" or "nbman2ht foo.1"
.\" See NodeBrain Developer Guide for project standards
.\"
.TH nb.lib 3 "July 2014" "NodeBrain 0.8.17" "NodeBrain Administrator Guide"
.SH NAME
nb.lib - NodeBrain Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <nb/nb.h>

\fBgcc\fP \fImain_pgm\fP\fB.c -lnb\fP [ -lm -ldl ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The NodeBrain library, \fBlibnb.so\fP, makes the NodeBrain C API
available to main routines.  This is the same API provided to node modules (plug-ins).
.SH EXAMPLE
If you want to experiment with embedding the NodeBrain interpreter in your
own program, you can use nb.c and various modules in the source distribution as
sample code.
Here's a trivial example.

.\"ht fixed
.nf
  #include <nb/nb.h>
  int main(int argc,char *argv[]){
    nbCELL context;

    printf("hello\\n");

    // Start the NodeBrain interpreter
    context=nbStart(argc,argv);

    // Issue some commands 
    nbCmd(context,"assert a==x+y;",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);
    nbCmd(context,"define r1 on(a>4):show -cells",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);
    nbCmd(context,"assert x=2,y=3;",NB_CMDOPT_ECHO);

    // Stop the interpreter
    nbStop(context);
    }
.fi

The \fINodeBrain Library\fP manual describing the API needs a lot of work,
and the API will be unstable prior to a 1.0 release. So consider it experimental
only.

.SH FILES
.IP nb.h
Header file for NodeBrain C API.
.IP libnb.so
NodeBrain C API library - dynamic.
.IP libnb.a
NodeBrain C API library - static.
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP NB_MODULE_PATH
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(3).
.P
.SH BUGS
The NodeBrain library is untested except for the API functions that
are exercised by \fBnb\fP(1) and the distributed node modules.
.SH AUTHOR
Ed Trettevik <eat@nodebrain.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"ht page
\fBnodebrain\fP(7),
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1),    
.\"ht page
\fBnb.cfg\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.syn\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(7) 

.\"ht doc
[1]
.I NodeBrain Home Page
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[2]
.I NodeBrain Guide
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[3]
.I NodeBrain Tutorial 
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[4]
.I NodeBrain Language
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[5]
.I NodeBrain Library
- http://www.nodebrain.org  
