@c Syslog tutorial
@c   A section to the NodeBrain Tutorial and Syslog Nodebrain Module docs.

@quotation
@i{I decided that it was not wisdom that enabled [poets] to write their poetry, but a kind of instinct or inspiration, such as you find in seers and prophets who deliver all their sublime messages without knowing in the least what they mean.}
---Socrates (469 BC--399 BC), in "Apology," sct. 21, by Plato
@end quotation

If your sublime messages are delivered via the syslog protocol, you may prefer to use a Syslog node instead of an Audit node.
This enables NodeBrain to respond immediately to arriving syslog UDP packets without waiting to poll a log file.

You have a couple options.
You can configure your Syslog node to listen on UDP port 514 on a server that doesn't already have a syslog daemon.
However, if you need (or want) more flexibility, I recommend that you use NodeBrain in combination with @code{syslog-ng}.
In that case, you configure NodeBrain to listen on a different port and configure @code{syslog-ng} to forward all or selected syslog entries to NodeBrain.

The example below is configured to listen on UDP port 1514, assuming @code{syslog-ng} is used to forward syslog to NodeBrain.

@cartouche
@smallexample
#!/usr/local/bin/nb -d
# File: tutorial/Syslog/syslog.nb
-rm syslog.log
set log="syslog.log",out=".";
define syslog node cache(~(h(8))):(~(1h):route,appl,group,node,object,severity,text(1));
syslog. define alarm if(text._hitState):$ -|mail.form @dots{}
@dots{} source=tutorial route="$@{route@}" appl="$@{appl@}" group="$@{group@}" @dots{}
@dots{} node="$@{node@}" severity="$@{severity@}" text="$@{text@}" >> mail.log
@b{syslog. define audit node syslog("syslog.nbx",1514);}
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

You should reference the documentation for @code{syslog-ng} to see how to configure it to forward to NodeBrain.
Here's an example to get you started.

@cartouche
@smallexample
destination nodebrain @{ udp("localhost" port(1514)); @};
filter f_nodebrain @{ host("(humpty|dumpty).mydomain.com|franklin.otherdomain.com"); @};
log @{ source(src);  filter(f_nodebrain); destination(nodebrain); @};
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

Refer to the @i{Audit Node} tutorial above for a sample @code{syslog.nbx} file.
Refer to the @i{Translator Node} tutorial for more information on coding a translator.
