.\" Process this file with "groff -man -Tascii foo.1" or "nbman2ht foo.1"
.\" See NodeBrain Developer Guide for project standards
.\"
.TH nb.man 7 "February 2013" "NodeBrain 0.8.14" "NodeBrain Administrator Guide"
.SH NAME
nb.man - NodeBrain Overview
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBman\fP \fIpage\fP
.IP
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP        - Interpreter, Agent, Client, Utility

.\"ht page
\fBnb.cfg\fP    - Configuration Files

.\"ht page
\fBnb.syn\fP    - Rule Language Command Syntax

.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP    - Node Modules (nb_<module>.so plugins)

.\"ht page
\fBnb.lib\fP    - C API Function Library (libnb.so)

.\"ht page
\fBnb.man\fP    - Overview

.\"ht page
\fBnbkit\fP     - NodeBrain Kit and Caboodle Utility

.P
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page provides a high level overview of NodeBrain with references to other documentation.
These pages are provided primarily as a convenience for Unix and Linux system administrators
who may have to deal with NodeBrain in some way on their system, but don't necessarily want to build
a new application or write NodeBrain rules. For this reason, the NodeBrain man pages are collectively called the
\fINodeBrain Administrator Guide\fP.  Programmers may find it helpful as well.  Never hurts
to have a few man pages to get oriented.

Programmers and system administrators who what to build a new application or just learn more, should
reference documents available online at http://www.nodebrain.org.
.SH GOAL
NodeBrain's primary mission in life is to be a light-weight event monitoring agent. In this respect,
NodeBrain fancies itself to be a tool for creating an event monitoring service like Apache is to web applications and
sendmail is to mail delivery.  These tools perform a useful service in the background
without the user awareness associated with a web browser or mail client.  Although the demand for event monitoring
is far less obvious than the demand for mail and web services, for those few unlucky folks who need
to monitor a stream of events, it would be nice to have a relatively simple, flexible, and free tool.
NodeBrain is at least free, and is trying to be simple and flexible---often 
competing goals.

Secondly, a NodeBrain agent would like to share information with peers. If one agent detects a condition
of interest, we want it to be able to report the condition to other agents.  This requires network communication
via TCP/IP, preferably with options for encryption and peer authentication.  This is supported by the peer module
distributed with NodeBrain.  The peer module implements the NodeBrain Protocol (NBP). 

Hopefully you are now visualizing a network of agents monitoring local streams of events and reporting
interesting conditions (generated events) to peers.  But we need a way to get events into these agents other
than communication with peer agents.  Our real sources of information are external. For this,
NodeBrain provides modules supporting multiple methods: servant scripts, FIFO's, queues, log file audit, SNMP traps, syslog, etc.
It can use STDIN for a batch job or an interactive client, and in both cases communicate with peers.  So NodeBrain
is also a client that enables the creation of an event stream into an agent.  As a batch job, or utility command,
it provides a loosely coupled application interface to the agents.  As an interactive client, it provides a
primitive line mode user interface to agents.
.SH SCRIPTS
Okay, so we have this tinker-toy component that can be used as an agent, an interactive client and a
utility program.  So now we need a way to describe the conditions we want it to respond to. 
We need a rule language.  Guess what?  NodeBrain \fIis\fP a rule language, and \fBnb\fP(1), is
the interpreter of this language.  Just when you were getting comfortable with the idea that NodeBrain is
an event monitoring agent, we claim it is an interpreter. Well, actually any program that processes input is an interpreter 
to some extent, but NodeBrain is a language you can use to write scripts.  
Here's a script called HelloWorld.

.nf
  #!/usr/local/bin/nb
  ^Hello World
.fi

Here we execute it.

.nf
  $ ./HelloWorld 2>/dev/null
  Hello World
  $
.fi

Imagine a Perl interpreter (you can substitute your favorite interpreter) running as a daemon listening for
code to interpret.  That's a pretty flexible agent.  Perhaps too flexible, but you could write 
code to impose constraints and structure on the incoming events and the types of actions the agent would
be willing to perform for various users or applications.  That would just be a Perl implementation
of a server of some kind. 

So why do we need a new language, this NodeBrain thing?  Why don't we just build an agent using an existing
interpreter?  That seems like a good idea if you can easily do what you want.  For example, some people use
Prolog as a rule engine.  That's nice because of the inferencing capabilities of Prolog.  We are just trying
to do something slightly different---we think. :)  We may have to plead ignorance if
proven wrong, but what we are trying to do with NodeBrain doesn't seem to be a good match for interpretive
languages we're familiar with.  We should also point out that NodeBrain is not a good substitute for what
other interpreters do well.  It is good, in the author's opinion, for a relatively specific problem space---the
state and event monitoring space.  All of our trusty favorite tools can be used in combination with NodeBrain
in this problem space.

.SH REACTIVE SCRIPTS
Monitoring applications typically watch for, and react to, predefined conditions.
Here's a simple reactive NodeBrain script.

.nf
  #!/usr/local/bin/nb -p
  define r1 on(a=1 and b=2) x=25;
.fi

For simplicity, we're illustrating the concept with an interactive script.  In the execution
below, user input is highlighted.  Normally, assertions will come from external sources.
.IP
.nf
$ \fB./reactor\fP

N o d e B r a i n   0.7.1 (Dunce) 2008/06/23

Compiled Jun 25 2008 16:31:35 s390x-ibm-linux-gnu

Copyright (C) 1998-2008 The Boeing Company
GNU General Public License
----------------------------------------------------------------

/usr/local/bin/nb -p ./reactor

Date       Time     Message
---------- -------- --------------------------------------------
2008/06/27 09:38:03 NB000I NodeBrain nb[23246] me@myserver
2008/06/27 09:38:03 NB000I Argument [1] -p
2008/06/27 09:38:03 NB000I Argument [2] ./reactor
> #!/usr/local/bin/nb -p
> define r1 on(a=1 and b=2) x=25;
2008/06/27 09:38:03 NB000I Source file "./reactor" included. size=57
2008/06/27 09:38:03 NB000I Reading from standard input.
---------- --------

> \fBassert a=1,b=7;\fP

> \fBassert b=2,c=15;\fP
2008/06/27 09:38:34 NB000I Rule r1 fired (x=25)

> \fBshow x\fP
x = 25

> \fBquit\fP
2008/06/27 09:38:48 NB000I NodeBrain nb[23246] terminating - exit code=0
.fi
.P
.SH DIAGNOSTIC SCRIPTS
But wait.  There is one more thing NodeBrain would like to add to its resume----diagnostic scripting.
You should think "baby expert system tool".  NodeBrain has a diagnostic mode that
enables it to solve for unknown conditions.  Here's a trivial and silly example.

.nf
  #!/usr/local/bin/nb -p
  define dog on(legs=4 and coat="fur" and tail);
  define cow on(legs=4 and coat="leather" and tail);
  define person on(legs=2 and (coat="skin" or coat="leather"));
  define bird on(legs=2 and coat="feathers" and tail);
  define fish on(!legs and coat="scales" and tail);
.fi

Let's call this diagnostic script "creature" and see what happens when we execute it.  You should imagine
that you are asking NodeBrain, with the help of the defined rules, to assist you in identifying a 
creature at the edge of a swimming pool.  To solve this problem, NodeBrain, requests a little information
from you. Your responses and NodeBrain's conclusion are highlighted.  

.IP
.nf
$ \fB./creature\fP

N o d e B r a i n   0.7.1 (Dunce) 2008/06/23

Compiled Jun 26 2008 19:52:51 s390x-ibm-linux-gnu

Copyright (C) 1998-2008 The Boeing Company
GNU General Public License
----------------------------------------------------------------

./nb -p ./creature

Date       Time     Message
---------- -------- --------------------------------------------
2008/06/27 07:01:37 NB000I NodeBrain nb[22427] me@myserver
2008/06/27 07:01:37 NB000I Argument [1] -p
2008/06/27 07:01:37 NB000I Argument [2] ./creature
> #!./nb -p
> define dog on(legs=4 and coat="fur" and tail);
> define cow on(legs=4 and coat="leather" and tail);
> define person on(legs=2 and (coat="skin" or coat="leather"));
> define bird on(legs=2 and coat="feathers" and tail);
> define fish on(!legs and coat="scales" and tail);
2008/06/27 07:01:37 NB000I Source file "./creature" included. size=274
2008/06/27 07:01:37 NB000I Reading from standard input.
---------- --------

> \fBquery\fP

  (legs=2)
  (!legs)
  (legs=4)

Enter cell legs==\fB2\fP

  (coat="leather")
  (coat="feathers")
  (coat="scales")
  (coat="skin")
  (coat="fur")

Enter cell coat==\fB"skin"\fP
2008/06/27 07:01:44 NB000I \fBRule person fired\fP

> \fBquit\fP
2008/06/27 07:02:02 NB000I NodeBrain nb[22427] terminating - exit code=0

.fi
.P
You will notice the user interface is not pretty. This is because we really expect this type of
script to run as a batch job and get the answers to the questions automatically, not by asking
a user.  This is done only for interactive testing of the rules.

The most important thing to notice in the example above is that NodeBrain never asked us what
kind of tail our creature has. It didn't have to.  It was able to select "person" and reject all
other possibilities without knowing anything about the tail.  This is how doctors and car mechanics
diagnose problems without running every possible expensive test---well, if we are lucky.  So the 
idea is for an agent to detect a condition based on rules and spawn a diagnostic script to determine
the underlying problem. We want our diagnostic script to be intelligent enough to only run
expensive tests when required.  The diagnostic script can take action to resolve a problem, if in fact
it determines there is a problem, or simply report its findings back to the agent rules for
further decision making.
.SH STATE AND EVENT MONITORING
We have been talking about state and event monitoring without providing a definition.  We've been assuming the
reader has an intuitive understanding that is close enough to what we mean.  Now we'll take the risk of
making it less clear by attempting an explanation. 

The first statement below describes a state, and the second statement describes an event.

  o  The sun is out.
  o  The sun came out from behind a cloud.

Both statements below describe states, but taken in sequence they describe an event---the same event
as the second statement above.

  o  The sun is behind a cloud.
  o  The sun is out.

In NodeBrain, a state is represented by a unique combination of values in all the cells.  Rules are used to
monitor the state of specific sets of cells for "interesting" changes in state.  A transition to an interesting
state is recognized as an event of interest.  In this scenario, we might argue that we are doing state monitoring and deriving events.

Now, let's think about it from the perspective of the source of this information.  If the sun is behind a cloud,
and you want to work in your internal office (no windows) until the sun comes out, you might ask a co-working with a window 
seat to let you know if the sun comes out from behind a cloud.  When the co-worker comes to your office and says "The sun is out",
the statement
matches our description of a state.  But you are both aware the co-working is really reporting an event, "The sun came out from
behind a cloud."  If you spent 15 minutes trying to finish up what you are working on and the co-worker returns to repeat the statement,
"The sun is out", what does this mean?  Does it mean the sun is still out, or that it went behind a cloud and came out again?  After all,
your request of the co-worker was to "let you know if the sun comes out from behind a cloud."

Suppose your request had been for the co-worker to come to your office every 15 minutes and tell you if the sun is out or if it is behind
a cloud.  Now the common understanding is that the co-worker (who is unreasonably patient with you) is reporting a state, and that you
will detect the state change of interest.  As an alternative, you might have an agreement that the co-working only report the state when
it changes.  In that case, the co-working is detecting the state change (an event) and reporting it as a new state, which you also
recognize as an event. 

As silly as this example is, NodeBrain supports these variations in the protocol between an agent and a peer (or other source of
information).  As NodeBrain commands, the statements above that report a state might look like this.

.nf
  assert sun="behind cloud";

  ... or ...

  \fBassert !sunny;\fP  # this could be used if we only have two states


  assert sun="out";

  ... -or ...

  \fBassert sunny;\fP
.fi

A NodeBrain rule, for monitoring this state might look like the following, assuming we elect to use the highlighted option above.

.nf
  define sunCameOut \fBon\fP(sunny): ... action ...
.fi

This rule would respond only twice to the following set of assertions because we are monitoring for a state change to sunny.

.nf
  assert sunny;  # action taken
  assert sunny;
  assert !sunny;
  assert !sunny;
  assert sunny;  # action taken
  assert sunny;
  assert sunny;
.fi
 
The statement used earlier for an event report can also be expressed as a NodeBrain command.  For this we use the verb ALERT
instead of ASSERT.                 

.nf
  \fBalert\fP type="SunCameOut";
.fi

Here's a rule to monitor for this event.  We are now using IF instead of ON.

.nf
  define sunCameOut \fBif\fP(type="SunCameOut"): ... action ...
.fi

This rule would respond three times to the following set of alerts because we are monitoring for events, and this represents
three events.

.nf
  alert type="SunCameOut";
  alert type="SunCameOut";
  alert type="SunCameOut";
.fi

One final point here.  Earlier we said an event is a change of state, and that we can monitor states to detect events.  It is
also true that we can monitor events to detect states.

.nf
  define sunCamOut if(type="SunCameOut") sunny;
  define sunHidden if(type="SunWentBehindCloud") !sunny;
.fi

The details are not important here, the point is simply that NodeBrain supports both the notion of a state and an event, and
can translate between the two.  It is very important to be able to recognize a reported event as just further evidence of
a known state.  If you have a leaky roof, every drip is an event.  However, you don't want to call the roof repair company every time
you detect a drip---you want to call them once each time the roof transitions into a state of disrepair, as evidenced by your
first detection of a drip.  Notice we converted from an event (drip) to a state (roof is in disrepair) and monitored for a state change
to recognized a higher level event (roof has transitioned to a state of disrepair).
.SH THE NAME
It may be obvious, but let's comment on the name, "NodeBrain".  
First the "Brain" part.  Like almost every program, \fBnb\fP(1) is a decision maker.
In the animal world, as best we understand it, this function is assigned to brains
when not overridden by hearts.
So we use the term "brain" to identify our program as a generalized decision maker.
To counter the notion that we think it is really smart, versions are given code names
like "Numskull", "Knucklehead" and "Dunce", at least in prototype versions.
The "Node" part has two explanations.
First, \fBnb\fP(1) is
designed to be an agent in a network of peers.
In this model, NodeBrain is a brain that
operates as a node within a network of brains.
Secondly, an executing instance of \fBnb\fP(1) is
a collection of nodes, each with a set of rules and extended functionality provided
by a node module.  So NodeBrain is a brain composed of nodes in addition to being a node within a network
of brains.

.SH FILES
NodeBrain does not actually care how rule files are named, but people
generally do.  Here are some guidelines.  We use \fB*.nb\fP as a generic
reference to a file containing NodeBrain commands, but other suffixes may be
used to identify the type of rules in a file.

.IP \fIname\fP\fB.nb\fP
Rule file passed as an argument to \fBnb\fP or included from within another rule file.
The *\fB.nb\fP suffix may also be used for executable scripts as an alternative to having
no extention.  It is a preferred alternative on Windows systems.
.IP \fIname\fP
Rule file with shebang ("#!") header to run as a script that might be re-written in
a different language.  I'm not personally keen on "executable" files having 
extensions that identify the language.  Seems silly to have to rename a script         
and modify all references just because we change the language.  But this 
is a lazy programmer's perspective.
.IP \fIname\fP\fB.nbx\fP
Text translation rules to convert a foreign text stream into a NodeBrain command steam.
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP NB_MODULE_PATH
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(5).
.P
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1).
.SH "HISTORY"
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1).
.SH BUGS
See
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1).
.SH AUTHOR
Ed Trettevik <eat@nodebrain.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"ht page
\fBnb\fP(1),    
.\"ht page
\fBnb.cfg\fP(7),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.syn\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.mod\fP(5),
.\"ht page
\fBnb.lib\fP(3), 
.\"ht page
\fBnbkit\fP(1), 
.\"ht page
\fBnbkit-caboodle\fP(7) 

.\"ht doc
[1]
.I NodeBrain Home Page
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[2]
.I NodeBrain Tutorial 
- http://www.nodebrain.org  

.\"ht doc
[3]
.I NodeBrain Language Reference
- http://www.nodebrain.org  
